# Notes 

## Week 1 | 4 January | Interpretation through Alteration

Hello! Welcome to 508. I'm looking forward to it. At some point during our first meeting, we should introduce ourselves and briefly review the [syllabus](index.html), which is also available in [PDF](syllabus.pdf). After you read the syllabus, please let me know of any concerns.   

### Assumptions

Let's start the seminar with some common assumptions about digital humanities (DH). If you don't mind, then I'd like to discuss each of these, with an emphasis on your familiarity with them and any questions you have.   

  * The field is a service. It merely develops and maintains digital resources for researchers. It does not interpret or meaningfully engage with pre-digital traditions in literary and cultural criticism.  
  * DH does not concern itself with the literary or aesthetic character of texts. It does not do hermeneutics. Instead, it is instrumentalist in character: a techno-solutionist byproduct of positivism and big data. It bypasses fiction and poetry for gadgets and whiz-bang.  
  * DH practitioners replace cultural perspectives with uncritical computer vision. Instead of privileging irony or ambiguity, they use computers to "prove" reductive claims about literature and culture, usually through graphs and totalizing visualizations. Literature and critical theory are subordinated to investments in data.  
  * To participate in the field, you must be fluent in computer programming, or at least willing to treat literature and culture quantitatively. If you are not a programmer, then you are not doing digital humanities. 

### Counter-assumptions

During this seminar, I suggest we complicate and counter these assumptions by: 

  * Doing digital studies without much, if any, interest in programming. For instance, I will not require you to conduct any programming exercises during workshops or outside of seminar. If you wish to apply programming to the material, then feel free. (I enjoy programming, too.)
  * Experimenting with a speculative thread of digital studies that is interested less in visualization, graphical expression, or big data and more in close reading, small data, and affordances (i.e., immeasurable yet specific relations between "animal and environment"; see [J.J. Gibson in 1979 on "The Ambient Optic Array"](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/gibsonVisualPerception.pdf)). 
  * Accounting for the ways in which art resists, diffracts, or escapes interpretation (or remediation) by computer vision. This may be something as basic as a text that is [not conducive to optical character recognition](http://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/may/01/scanner-ebook-arms-anus-optical-character-recognition) or search mechanisms; we might also consider the categorization and indexing of art via practices such as descriptive metadata.
  * Historicizing digital studies through legacies of experimental media and aesthetics prior to personal computing and the internet. One trick here will be negotiating our relationship with the "avant-garde." For instance, can we balance assertions for autonomy or rupture with materialist investments in the everyday? Or, how do we address the ideologies overtly at work in avant-garde aesthetics? 
  * Thinking through paradigms that do not privilege legibility, speed, massiveness, mining, or even discovery. Important question: can you manage such paradigms without relying on romantic individualism, or without assuming we can "withdraw" from the systems we interpret? I ask because I'm personally skeptical of recent, rather nostalgic obsessions with pre-digital living and labour. Can we maintain critiques of computational or algorithmic logic without inventing (or assuming) a history of "simpler times"? While I don't want to rely too much on qualifiers such as "pre" and "post," I do wonder if we might unpack something like a "post-digital" approach to print and old media during this seminar. This approach might involve locating new media (see [Manovich in 2001 on "What Is New Media?"](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/manovichNewMedia.pdf)) in our everyday lives (as a given, as something banal or familiar) to then prototype alternative histories and possibilities. This way, "digital" is not synonymous with "revolutionary" or even "novel." Maybe it's quite boring.     
  * Conducting a series of experiments that blend technique with conceptualization, stuff with ideas, maintenance with novelty, and material specificity with politics and aesthetics. These experiments might follow in a long tradition of dialectics accounting for relations between the abstract and particular.  
  * Resisting a "make or break" logic, with a bias instead toward "care and repair" as practices fundamental to literary and cultural practice. Later in the term, we'll specifically talk about alternatives to suspicion. For now, we might highlight how innovation and obsolescence operate through technologies (or "technocultures"; see [Andrew Ross in 1990](http://pmc.iath.virginia.edu/text-only/issue.990/ross-1.990)).  

### Postulations

To manage all of this, let us entertain a series of postulations for the seminar. These postulations are below, with some references to the scholarship informing them. We'll discuss their consequences or implications by anchoring them in weekly exercises, where each of you will alter a single text (of your choice) using specific techniques (e.g., ["reverse it,"](index.html#week10) ["redact it,"](index.html#week11) ["glitch it"](index.html#week11)). Together, these acts of alteration may be understood as a sequence of prototyping: testing interpretations and their affordances as they manifest in physical or tactile form.   

**Postulation 1:** *What if digital studies is primarily about design? Or, what happens if we privilege design as a way to interpret literary and cultural history?* These questions are especially inspired by the work of [Anne Balsamo, who (in "Design," published in 2010](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/balsamoDesign.pdf)) outlines four ways to define design: 

  * "aesthetic embellishments or nonfunctional aspects of a product or application," where, in an aesthetic tradition, design is separate from its object (Balsamo 2010: 2); 
  * "a solution to a problem," where, in an engineering tradition, design is associated with an evaluable task meant to solve a puzzle (2010: 2);
  *  "a domain of creative expression," where design, in an arts tradition, stresses the practices through which materials are shaped into a form (2010: 2); and 
  * "a practice of cultural reproduction," where design, in a cultural studies (or "design studies") tradition, is studied as a combination of "ontological frameworks, methodologies, institutional formations, and cultural manifestations" (2010: 2). Here, we have, at least in part, a kind of "meta" approach to design. Admittedly, this approach seems like a good fit for humanities methodologies.  

Later, Balsamo argues that people (or, more specifically, designers) should be "encouraged to develop a robust imagination about *what could and should* be done differently with technologies that are already in existence" (2010: 7). Put this way, design should be not only described and theorized but also exercised. In this seminar, we might replace Balsamo's "technologies" with "texts," asking ourselves what could and should be done differently with texts already in existence. In so doing, we could also summon [Philip Agre's notion of "critical technical practice"](https://books.google.ca/books?id=XSaPAwAAQBAJ&lpg=PA155&ots=0bdW23uS1Z&dq=A%20critical%20technical%20practice%20will%2C%20at%20least%20for%20the%20foreseeable%20future%2C%20require%20a%20split%20identity%20--%20one%20foot%20planted%20in%20the%20craft%20work%20of%20design%20and%20the%20other%20foot%20planted%20in%20the%20reflexive%20work%20of%20critique&pg=PA131#v=onepage&q&f=false): "A critical technical practice will, at least for the foreseeable future, require a split identity&mdash;one foot planted in the craft work of design and the other foot planted in the reflexive work of critique" (Agre 1997: 155). 

More recently, there's Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby with *Speculative Everything*, published in 2013. There, they point to fiction as a way of thinking about "critical design," which is not art but rather "an alternative to how things are. It is the gap between reality as we know it and the different idea of reality referred to in . . . [a] proposal that creates space for discussion" (Dunne and Raby 2013: 35). When we prototype texts in this seminar, we could approach them as gaps between history as we know it and a different idea of history referenced by the altered text at hand. This may give us a stronger sense of how design studies meaningfully engages literary and cultural studies.     

**Postulation 2:** *What if design practice is about both speculation and repair? Or, what if the history of literature and culture is a broken world?* This postulation prompts us to approach literary and cultural history as states of constant change across contexts, formats, media, audiences, archives . . . . The list goes on. In a way, digital studies stewards those changes, with possible futures and potential conditions in mind. 

When prototyping texts, we may rehearse [Guilford's Alternative Uses Task](http://www.indiana.edu/~bobweb/r546/modules/creativity/creativity_tests/guilford_uses_task.html) to list the many possible manifestations of a single text. What if it were a . . . ? Or a . . . ? Then we can produce these versions and interpret them accordingly.  

For me, [the work of Daniela Rosner and Morgan Ames](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/rosnerAmesDesigningForRepair.pdf) (2014) is informative here. They refer to "negotiated endurance," or "the ways that maintenance, care, and repair are negotiated&mdash;often collaboratively&mdash;in use and the meaning-making associated with use, rather than the meanings pre-specified by designers" (Rosner and Ames 2014: 9). For us, questions of negotiated endurance may involve attending to issues that authors cannot anticipate (e.g., what will happen to their work as conditions change). They may also nudge us to research the historical and material particulars of texts: who made them, when, and how, together with how they've migrated, morphed, or "broken down" (whatever that means for a text). What's more, negotiated endurance should help us account for matters of provenance, variance, witnessing, circulation, and appropriation (e.g., who should alter or recontextualize a text, in what form, with what acknowledgments, and under what assumptions).

[Stephen Jackson's notion of "broken world thinking"](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/jacksonRethinkingRepair.pdf) is helpful here, too. Jackson warns us of "the twin analytic dangers of nostalgia and heroism" (2014: 233). As part of broken world thinking, he recommends:

* thinking beyond the binaries of "senders and receivers, producers and consumers, designers and users" (2014: 234);
* directing our attention away from novelty (or "the shock of the new") toward "the myriad forms of activity by which the shape, standing, and meaning of objects in the world [are] produced and sustained" (2014: 234); 
* expanding our articulation of timelines beyond origin stories or ruptures to account for the long shelf life of material culture, including its maintenance and repair (2014: 234); 
* "building bridges to new and adjacent fields" (2014: 235), which, in this case, include bridges between technology studies (Jackson's field) and media, literary, cultural, and design studies; and 
* "positioning the world of things as an active component and partner in the ongoing project of building more humane, just, and sustainable collectives" (2014: 235). In this instance, it is important to note that, for Jackson, a thing is not a fetish. It is closer to a congealed process, tactile relationship, or bundle of components.    

As Jackson acknowledges, broken world thinking corresponds with how Walter Benjamin perceived history, "collecting and recuperating the world around him" (Jackson 2014: 237). For this seminar, how might the alteration of texts (however fragmentary) also be an act of recuperation? 

**Postulation 3:** *What if interpretation is expressed through not only text but also prototypes? What do literary prototypes do, and how?* Thus far, these three questions have been running in the background of my notes for this week, so I'll foreground them here. While scholarship in design often treats text as the enemy, we might instead think about design and text, or prototyping and literature, together. 

Such gestures have plenty of precedent in the humanities. For me, [Johanna Drucker's work on artists' books](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/druckerFiguringTheWord.pdf) immediately comes to mind; there, the word is often image, part of a long history of [graphic design](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/druckerMcVarishGraphicDesignHistory.pdf). [Drucker's speculative computing work with Bethany Nowviskie](http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/view?docId=blackwell/9781405103213/9781405103213.xml&chunk.id=ss1-4-10) is also relevant: "Our goal is to place the hermeneut inside a visual and algorithmic system, where his or her very presence alters an otherwise mechanistic process at the quantum level" (Drucker and Nowviskie 2004: n. pag.). Textual systems become arranged systems that we may inhabit and even alter. When we write a text, we design it, too. Perhaps the key question is how palpable the design is.    
  
Many also reference [Bruce Sterling's notion of "design fiction,"](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/sterlingDesignFiction.pdf) which combines design (as "a method of action," following Charles Eames) with literature (as "a method of meaning and feeling") (Sterling 2009: 24). While we might dispute Sterling's formation here, we now see a thing called "design fiction" at work across many present-day labs, studios, conferences, and publications. For instance, the MIT Media Lab has a [Design Fiction research group](https://www.media.mit.edu/research/groups/design-fiction).

In digital humanities, there's [Kari Kraus's "Conjectural Criticism,"](http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/3/4/000069/000069.html) published in 2009. Kraus's work deeply informs this seminar: "examples of conjecture include the recovery of lost readings in classical texts and the computational modeling of the evolution of a literary work" (Kraus 2009: para. 4). "Expressed in grammatical terms, conjecture operates in the subjunctive and conditional moods. Because its range of motion extends beyond the pale of the empirical, its vocabulary is replete with coulds, mights, mays, and ifs. Such a vocabulary reflects not caution&mdash;on the contrary, conjecture is a radical, audacious editorial style&mdash;but rather a refusal to settle for attested states of texts" (2009: para. 9). She argues: "We might, for starters, imagine conjecture as a knowledge toolkit designed to perform 'what if' analyses across a range of texts. In this view, the text is a semiotic system whose discrete units of information can be artfully manipulated into alternate configurations that may represent past or future states" (2009: para. 15). For Kraus, material experimentation is (or should be) central to the practice of interpretation, and it can do more than heal, mask, or rectify the changes that occur in texts. It can produce those changes and examine the effects. In this sense, perhaps literary prototypes, or design fictions, weld the practices of reading and interpretation with their objects of inquiry.  

**Postulation 4:** *What if meaning is entangled with matter? Or, in the relations between interpretations and materials, where do we locate agency?* Here, I'm specifically drawing from [Karen Barad's *Meeting the Universe Halfway*](http://jenteryteaches.com/noneshall/508/baradMeetingTheUniverseHalfway.pdf), published in 2007. For the purposes of this seminar, Barad prompts us to shift: 

*  From studies of mimesis or sameness (e.g., copies of originals, or words mirroring things) to considerations of differences over time and across instances (Barad 2007: 89); 
*  From representational (e.g., stable boundaries between subjects and objects) to performative paradigms (e.g., subjects and objects emerge through relationships/situations) (2007: 89); 
*  From words and things to the entanglement of materials and discourse (2007: 89); 
*  From nature/culture binaries to patterns of difference (2007: 89); 
*  From reading against to reading through (2007: 90); 
*  From things to phenomena as objective referents (e.g., how phenomena produce boundaries or "cuts" between this and that) (2007: 90); 
*  From reflection to diffraction (2007: 90);
*  From reification or simplification to fine-grained details (2007: 90); and
*  From "reflecting on representations" to "accounting for how practices matter" (2007: 90). 

We could spend an entire term unpacking this list, or reading and discussing Barad's compelling book. At this point, though, I want to underscore ways we might refrain from assuming neat, material distinctions between authors, audiences, interpretation, and texts, or between design, matter, making, and form, or between inscription, transmission, circulation, and media. Barad: "We do not uncover preexisting facts about independently existing things as they exist frozen in time like little statues positioned in the world. Rather, we learn about phenomena&mdash;about specific material configurations of the world's becoming. . . . *[P]ractices of knowing are specific material engagements that participate in (re)configuring the world*" (2007: 90-91). In my experience, prototyping highlights how we change texts as we interpret them. It also stresses how texts do not determine their interpretations and are not neutral, inert, or transparent objects (e.g., that instrumentally translate input into output). From my perspective, they shape how we know and perceive the world, and this influence is contingent upon when, where, and how they are read as text, discourse, and matter.  

To conclude our postulations, we might ask how, in many ways, prototyping texts ultimately concerns what we mean by "description" in literary and cultural studies. Building on the work of Charles Sanders Peirce, Fred Moten uses the term, "second iconicity" (2003: 92), in his book, *In the Break*, to demonstrate how writing not only refers to and represents experiences but also performs them through description (as opposed to explanation). Moten: "we must attempt a description of an experience whose provenance or emergence is not
reducible to logical structure, pictorial internal relation or internal
similarity; it is an experience of the passage or cut that cannot be
explained because those formulations upon which our explanations must
be grounded . . . are themselves so profoundly without ground" (2003: 92). For Moten, description allows us to notice aspects of experience and improvise with the materiality of language, the ontology of which is never stable or frozen. For us, perhaps prototypes may operate as suggestive or evocative descriptions, pointing to a gap between history (or attested states of texts) and possibilities (or conjectured states of texts). As such, prototyping is not really meant to uncover hidden dimensions of literature and culture or to explain them away. It is intended to perform and experiment with the contingencies of difference, and to identify which differences matter, when, and why. We'll discuss this later in the term, but I like to think that such an approach involves questioning the surface or face value of texts without relying too heavily (if at all) on suspicion.  
